Different input devices enable you to enter data and programs into a computer in different ways.
Keyboards and mice are the most common input devices.
You can use a track ball in place of a mouse.
A track ball is normally fixed to the keyboard of a notebook computer.
A touch screen is a special monitor.
You can touch the screen with your finger to select an option.
Touch screens are commonly found in shopping centres, tourist information centres, bus interchanges, airports and hotels.
Graphics tablets are commonly used by artists and designers.
They have to use a special pen called a stylus.
The pen works with the graphics tablet to produce drawings or designs on the screen.
A scanner can be used to input printed text and pictures into a computer.
The scanned text or image can be edited and used in desktop publishing.
A scanner can be used with special software that can convert printed characters into computer data.
This process is known as optical character recognition (OCR).
The output from the computer is displayed in different formats using different output devices.
A monitor is used to display output on screen.
There are different types of printers such as dot-matrix printers, inkjet printers and laser printers.
The printhead of a dot-matrix printer consists of a number of pins.
During printing, the pins are pushed onto the ink-ribbon and the dot patterns printed on paper form the output.
Dot-matrix printers can be used to print carbon copies of documents.
One disadvantage of dot-matrix printers is that they are usually quite noisy.
An inkjet printer sprays fine drops of ink on paper to provide good quality output.
Printing in colour can be done by mixing inks of different colours.
Inkjet printers are quiet and make copies relatively quickly.
A laser printer uses laser beams to produce good quality output.
Of the three types of printers, laser printers produce the highest quality output at the fastest speed.
Plotters are commonly used to print large multicoloured drawings of high quality.
These drawings include charts, architectural and technical drawings.
Data in computers is stored in either the main memory or secondary storage media.
It takes one byte of storage space to store one character such as the letter 'A'.
The main memory of a computer is also known as random access memory (RAM).
It is a working area for storing program instructions and data currently used by the central processing unit.
It holds data temporarily.
This means that the data stored in the main memory is lost when you switch off the computer.
One important use of computers is that they can store data for future use.
To keep programs and data permanently, you have to save them in secondary storage media.
Data stored in secondary storage media, such as hard disks, floppy disks and CD-ROMs, is not lost when you switch off the computer.
Data is read or written on a hard disk or a floppy disk by a disk drive.
A disk drive is therefore an input device as well as an output device.
A hard disk can store more data than a floppy disk.
It is also faster to access data stored on hard disks than on floppy disks.
However, hard disks are usually fixed to system units.
Floppy disks allow you to use the data on other computers.
A CD-ROM looks like a music CD.
It can store 650 MB of data, which is about 450 times more than a 1.44 MB floppy disk.
Data is recorded onto CD-ROMs by special machines in the CD-ROM manufacturing factory.
The CD-ROM drive uses laser beams to read data on the CD-ROM.
Users can only read the data stored on a CD-ROM but cannot write on it.
This is why it is called CD Read-Only Memory (ROM).